Update Favipiravir section of theraputics (#244)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.treatments.md

#### Nucleotide Analogs
Removing this header for now, if we add additional nucleotide analogs, we can put it back
Why one might use nucleotide analogs.
#### Favipiravir

Favipiravir (T-705) was discovered by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. [@url:https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB12466#reference-A191688].

> The drug was found to effective to block viral amplification for several Influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses (Flaviviridae, Picornaviridae) based on reduction in plaque formations [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002]and viral replication in MDCK cells[@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The drug was found to effective at blocking viral amplification in several Influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses (Flaviviridae, Picornaviridae) based on reduction in plaque formations [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002] and viral replication in MDCK cells [@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06]. 
```

> The drug was found to effective to block viral amplification for several Influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses (Flaviviridae, Picornaviridae) based on reduction in plaque formations [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002]and viral replication in MDCK cells[@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The drug was found to be effective at blocking viral amplification in several Influenza subtypes as well as other RNA viruses (Flaviviridae, Picornaviridae) based on reduction in plaque formations [@doi:10.1128/AAC.46.4.977-981.2002]and viral replication in MDCK cells[@doi:10.1128/AAC.01051-06]. 
```

> Furthermore, mice inoculated with Favipiravir was shown to increase survivalability. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, inoculation of mice with Favipiravir was shown to increase survivability. 
```
What did the mice have?

> In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan in order to treat patients infected with influenza and were resistant to conventional treatments, like neuraminidase inhibitors [@doi:10.2183/pjab.93.027].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan for the treatment of patients infected with influenza that was resistant to conventional treatments, like neuraminidase inhibitors [@doi:10.2183/pjab.93.027].
```

##### Anticipated Mechanism

> Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA polymerase in a dose dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including Influenza virus [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01074-08; @doi:10.1128/AAC.00356-07; @doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA polymerase in a dose-dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including Influenza virus [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01074-08; @doi:10.1128/AAC.00356-07; @doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10]. 
```
You explain a little more about the purine nucleoside below. Perhaps would it would make sense to give a wider-lens perspective here of what it's doing and then get into the details below?

Author: That will be very helpful to add!

Reviewer: I like the text you have below! I made a suggestion about moving one sentence up to keep the molecular bio together and then the medicine as kind of the conclusion -- not sure what you think about that!

Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced with the addition of Favipiravir in early times post-infection [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].
Additionally, biochemical experiments showed that Favipiravir was recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template. 

> A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription, however multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].
```

> A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription, however multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single incorporation of the analogue does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].
```

Author: thank you for the suggestions, looks like you found the same ones as other reviewers!

##### Current Evidence
The effectiveness of Favipiravir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under investigation.
An open-label, nonrandomized, before-after controlled study was recently conducted [@doi:10.1016/j.eng.2020.03.007].

> The study included 80 COVID-19 patients (35 treated with Favipiravir, 45 control) from the isolation ward of the national clinical research center for infectious diseases (The Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The study included 80 COVID-19 patients (35 treated with Favipiravir, 45 control) from the isolation ward of the National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases (The Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China.
```

> The patients in the control group were treated with the other anti-virals, such as Lopinavir and Ritonavir.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The patients in the control group were treated with other anti-virals, such as Lopinavir and Ritonavir.
```

> Treatment applied on days 2-14; treatment stopped when viral clearence was confirmed or at day 14.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Treatment was applied on days 2-14; treatment stopped either when viral clearance was confirmed or at day 14.
```

> The efficacy of the treatment was measured by 1)the time until viral clearance using Kaplan-Meier survival curves and 2)the improvement rate of chest computed tomography (CT) scans on day 14 after treatment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The efficacy of the treatment was measured by 1) the time until viral clearance using Kaplan-Meier survival curves, and 2) the improvement rate of chest computed tomography (CT) scans on day 14 after treatment.
```

The study found that Favipiravir increased the speed of recovery (measured as viral clearance from the patient by RT-PCR) to 4 days compared to 11 days using other antivirals such as lopinavir and ritonavir. 

> Additionally, the lung CT scans of patients treated with Favipiravir showed significant improvement rates (91%) on day 14 compared to the 62% of control patients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the lung CT scans of patients treated with Favipiravir showed significantly higher improvement rates (91%) on day 14 compared to control patients (62%).
```

However, there were adverse side effects in 4 (11%) Favipiravir-treated patients and 25 (56%) control patients.

> The adverse side effects included: diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash, liver and kidney injury.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The adverse side effects included: diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash, and liver and kidney injury.
```

> Overall, despite the study reporting clinical improvement in Favipiravir-treated patients, due to the some issues with study design, it cannot be determined whether treatment with Favipiravir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of any treatment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, despite the study reporting clinical improvement in Favipiravir-treated patients, due to some issues with study design, it cannot be determined whether treatment with Favipiravir had an effect or whether these patients would have recovered regardless of any treatment.
```

> For example, the sample size is too small to give a powerful statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the sample size is too small to adequately power the statistical analysis.
```
Did they do statistical analyses that you're critiquing? If they refrained from doing inappropriate stats, then the word "the" should be removed from my suggestion

Author: They performed chi-square tests to compare categorical data, and the Wilcoxon rank-sum test or Student’s t test for continuous data. I'm not sure what is an appropriate sample size needed, but this does seem like a reasonable number to get some significance but I wasn't sure as a non-stats person. This is some of the old text that I didn't update from the original author.

Reviewer: Ah! Thanks Alex. This text seems to be referring to the Kaplan Meier survival curve analysis which is not something I'm particularly comfortable speculating about coming from a psych/genomics stats background! It seems like they should have done a power analysis as part of study design but I don't see any info in the manuscript. Honestly it doesn't look egregiously underpowered to me, the IQR are almost non-overlapping for the two treatment conditions.
Perhaps this hedges a bit better?:
```suggestion
For example, although there were significant differences between the two treatment groups, follow-up analysis is necessary due to the small sample size.
```

Author: I agree! I'm also not a super stats person, but I was also thinking that some sort of power analysis would make sense and there wasn't one from what I read either. This IQR look distinct to me too..I think this new wording is a good balance

> The choice of the patients did not take into consideration important factors such as previous clinical conditions, sex, while there was no age categorisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The selection of patients did not take into consideration important factors such as previous clinical conditions or sex, and there was no age categorization.
```

> The study was not randomized or blinded and the baseline control group was another antiviral instead of a placebo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The study was not randomized or blinded, and the baseline control group was another antiviral instead of a placebo.
```

> Additional randomized controlled trials are still required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, additional randomized controlled trials are still required.
```

Furthermore, inoculation of mice with Favipiravir was shown to increase survivability. 
In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan for the treatment of patients infected with influenza that was resistant to conventional treatments, like neuraminidase inhibitors [@doi:10.2183/pjab.93.027].

##### Anticipated Mechanism
Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA polymerase in a dose dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including Influenza virus [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01074-08; @doi:10.1128/AAC.00356-07; @doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10]. 
Nucleotide/side are the natural building blocks for RNA synthesis.
Because of this, modifications to these nucleotides/sides can disrupt key processes including replication [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.04.004].

> Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced with the addition of Favipiravir in early times post-infection [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Additionally, biochemical experiments showed that Favipiravir was recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Biochemical experiments showed that Favipiravir was recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template. 
```

> A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068347].
Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced with the addition of Favipiravir in early times post-infection [@doi:10.1128/AAC.49.3.981-986.2005; @doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034; @doi:10.1128/AAC.01219-10].
```
